Hello they're welcome to another session of limit less calculus.
Today we're going to cover a very cool concept called Limits.
We're going to talk about what they are how they work and their properties.
So to get started on limits I want you to think of something so I imagine that to get to school every
morning you have to drive from your house
up to school
and let's say that for some divine reason you live on the same street as your school.
So you don't have to make any turns you just go directly from your house to school.
It's a straight line.
And every morning you take the same route and every time you take that route it takes you 20 minutes
to get there.
On average.
All right.
Wouldn't that be beautiful.
That would be awesome.
Unless you live on campus which is even better.
But again just for the sake of the example you drive to school from your house every morning and it
takes you 20 minutes.
So one morning as you're driving toward school and you get to the last stop which is here you notice
that there's a detour
Oh no it's going to take you more than 20 minutes.
You're going to be late to class.
So what the Detour does is it actually takes you through this route.
OK so you have to come down.
You have to make a left.
I'm saying left looking at it from the point of view of the car and you have to make another left and
then you have to make one more left.
So you were driving towards Call your usual route but then you had to take a detour.
You still got there at the end but you didn't get there through the usual route.
Enter the concept of limits OK.
Perfect.
So now we have the definition of a limit.
A limit is the y value that a function is approaching assets x value approaches a number.
I'll repeat that again.
The y value that a function is approaching assets x value approaches a number.
The first thing I want you to note is a limit is a number that a y value is approaching.
All right.
Once you get this the fact that we're talking about y values the height of the function it's going to
be a lot easier.
So again a limit is the y value that a function is approaching.
So just remember what we were talking about just now you drive to school every morning as you drive
towards school.
What is it that you're approaching or approaching school.
Right.
But then you had to take a detour at the end of the day.
Let's say you got there late to class.
Well it doesn't matter for limits because for a limit what matters is why is it that you are approaching
what are you getting close to.
Let's say that is a farfetched scenario that as you're driving to school you'll find out that the school
moved yesterday to a different place.
Well you were approaching school.
It doesn't matter if eventually you got there or not but you were approaching it.
That's what limits are all about y values approaching certain numbers as x values approach other numbers
and here's how we didn't know limits
we say lym of fallbacks
as x approaches see equals L and actually if you're observant enough you'll notice that the logo for
limitless calculus is based on this.
The logo looks something like this.
It's LYM.
And then you have the rest.
So this part the limb actually came from the concept of limits.
So again to denote a limit we say Lim of f of x f of x is the function for which are finding a limit
as x approaches c.
So remember as the input approaches a certain value then the y value or the output approaches a certain
y value doesn't matter if it gets there at the end of the day or it doesn't one important thing about
limits is that they can be approached from the left or from the right.
Now what does that mean.
Well let me show you here with a quick graph.
So let's say we have this function
OK OK so I know you're thinking What the heck is that.
It's called a piecewise function.
And now explain right now how it works.
Piecewise
function.
So a piecewise function is a function that is composed of different functions for different intervals.
So for example from here to the left it's a curve.
However from here to the right it's a line.
All right.
So let's say that this is one to the left of one we have a certain function that's a curve and then
to the right of one we have another function which is a line.
Doesn't this not pass the vertical line to us.
Because if you draw a vertical line here then it's touching the graph at two points.
If you draw a vertical line here it actually does pass the vertical line test because the function is
defined here.
For one not here.
So if I plug in one into this piecewise function it's going to give me this value here not the one down
here.
And we know that because this circle is filled then this one is actually not filled in.
OK.
So we don't have to get into too much detail about piecewise functions but let's do the limit.
OK so let's say that this y value is 3 right.
So we go up 1 to 3.
This is three.
And this is let's say 7 OK.
So let's get the limit of this function as it approaches one from the left and one from the right we'll
do it over here.
So the limits of fallbacks
as it approaches
one from the left.
So we don't know whether a limit is approaching from the left or from the right.
We say as x approaches the number and then we put either the negative sign for the left or positive
sign for right I'll put that here for you.
So negative means left
and positive means right.
So as we approach this value of 1 from the left it looks like when it gets there it's going to be three
right.
So again if I take this function and one is over here.
So we need to approach the point at one from the left you come from the left come from the left come
from the left.
And again it looks like the y value that it is approaching is at 3.
So for that reason the answer to this is three.
Now what happens if we approach it from the right
as x approaches one from the right.
It's positive.
Well let's look at the function again.
So we're approaching 1.
However we're not doing it from the left anymore.
We're doing it from the right.
So as you approach it from the right from the right from the right you approaching one approaching 1
Bam when you get here it looks like it's approaching 7 right.
It looks like when it gets there how it's going to be seven.
Therefore our limit here is 7.
So what do we have here.
We have a limit approaching from the left and a limit approaching from the right.
They're both approaching one just from different sites.
So what I want you to understand is for this function f of one is not defined here but it's defined
up here so f of 1 for this function
equals 7.
That means that if I plug in one into this function whatever the function is it's going to give me the
point 1 7 and again we know this because the circle is filled in up here now down here.
However for limits it does not matter where the function is defined as you can see the limit of f of
x x approaches 1 from the left is already here 3 because the y value is approaching 3.
It doesn't matter that it's not three at that point.
What matters is is that it's actually approaching it.
That's why the limit here is equal to 3.
Same thing for the limit as it approaches from the right limit of every x x x approaches one from the
right.
Again as you come from the right it looks like it's going to be seven.
That's why the limit is seven.
Now it turns out that this limit is actually accurate because not only is it approaching 7 it's actually
7 when you get there.
But in the other limit from the left it's not three when you get there.
But again that doesn't matter.
What matters is that it's actually approaching.
So again he points for limits.
Number one no they are talking about what the y value is approaching.
And number two key word here is approaching again.
Doesn't matter what it is when you get there.
Just the fact that you're getting there is enough for a limit.
All right so let's throw a familiar limit.
OK.
So let's try for example.
Half of X equals
2 x plus 1.
All right.
So let's go ahead and grab this function sort of it.
Again we just grab two points.
X and y let's plug in
0 2 times 0 plus 1 to them 0 0.
So we just keep the 1.
So our first point is 0 1
and it's plug in 1 so two of times won
plus one that's two times one is two plus one is three.
So that's one.
All right.
So we're ready to grab this function since we have our two points.
So our first point is going to be a 0 1 so x 0.
We did not move left or right and we moved one up because Y is positive and our second point is 1 3.
So we move one to the right because it's positive 1 and 3 up because it's positive 3 1 2 3
right.
Again remember that's supposed to be a straight line but I cannot draw for the life of me.
So OK we have our function and we have a graph for that function
let's say that we want to find the limit as x approaches
1 OK.
We know that when it actually gets there when it actually gets to 1 the y values 3 let's see what f
of x is approaching as x approaches 1.
So first let's do it from the left limit of IVAX as x approaches one from the left.
And in fact we'll do it a little bit differently this time.
So we'll have a table
and if we're approaching one from the left that means that the values the x values are getting closer
and closer and closer to 1.
So I'm going to just pick three values that are really close to 1.
So 0.9
0 Whoops.
Let's try that again.
Zero point nine nine and even closer zero point nine nine nine.
All right.
And we're going to plug in all of these into our function here.
And you don't have to go into the trouble of plugging those in.
I already got the numbers and I'm going to plug them in.
So remember all we're doing is taking these x values and plug in them in each one into this function.
So I have the results right here with me.
So when X equals 0.9 y equals two points eight when X equals zero point nine nine y equals two point
ninety eight and when X equals zero point nine nine nine y equals two point nine nine eight interesting.
So as X is getting closer to 1 first 0.9 then zero point nine nine and then zero point nine nine nine.
Why is getting closer to what.
Well first it is 2.8 then two point ninety eight and that two point nine nine eight right.
So it seems like it's getting closer and closer to three.
So we have really strong evidence that as x approaches one from the left then the y value approaches
three.
So I'll say that the limit of x x x approaches one from the left is three based on her evidence down
here.
Now let's do it from the right.
And of course the limit from the right I have to do it on the right.
No I'm just kidding.
You really have to.
But for this example I did the limit from the left is on the left and the limit from the right is actually
on the right which we're doing right now a limit of half of X as x approaches 1 from the right.
So let's continue in the next video.